Update release-overview (#592)
mattermost/mattermost-handbook: operations/research-and-development/product/release-process/release-overview.md

- Release frequency: As required
- Example: v1.2.5, v1.2.6

## Overview of Release Cycles

> Currently Mattermost Cloud releases occur on a 2-week cycle, but the goal is to release to frequently. Cloud and Self-Managed PRs don’t need to be cherry-picked to releases, except for any last minute bug fixes that get merged after the release branch is cut, and any necessary hotfixes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently Mattermost Cloud releases occur on a 2-week cycle, but the goal is to release more frequently. Cloud and Self-Managed PRs don’t need to be cherry-picked to releases, except for any last minute bug fixes that get merged after the release branch is cut, and any necessary hotfixes.
```

> Currently Cloud releases occur on a 2-week cycle, but the goal is to release to Cloud more frequently than every 2 weeks. PRs don’t need to be cherry-picked to releases (both Cloud and on-prem), except for any last bug fixes that get merged after the release branch is cut as well as for any hotfixes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently Mattermost Cloud releases occur on a 2-week cycle, but the goal is to release to frequently than every 2 weeks. PRs don’t need to be cherry-picked to releases (both Mattermost Cloud and self-managed), except for any last bug fixes that get merged after the release branch is cut as well as for any hotfixes.
```

> Currently Cloud releases occur on a 2-week cycle, but the goal is to release to Cloud more frequently than every 2 weeks. PRs don’t need to be cherry-picked to releases (both Cloud and on-prem), except for any last bug fixes that get merged after the release branch is cut as well as for any hotfixes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cloud releases currently occur every 2-weeks, but the goal is to release to Cloud more frequently. Cloud and on-prem PRs don’t need to be cherry-picked to releases, except for any last minute bug fixes that get merged after the release branch is cut, and any necessary hotfixes.
```

> Schedule for Cloud releases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Schedule for Mattermost Cloud releases:
```

>  - (T-7): 1 week prior to the release day, master is fast-forwarded to the “cloud” branch.

Reviewer: Is this another case of changing "fast-forward" to merge? If so: "...the `master` branch is merged to the Cloud branch."

>  - (T-7): 1 week prior to the release day, master is fast-forwarded to the cloud branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - (T-7): 1 week prior to the release day, master is fast-forwarded to the “cloud” branch.
```

 - (T-0): Release Day

Schedule for on-prem releases:

>  - (T-30): Feature Review / Judgment Day / Release branch cut

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - (T-30): Feature Review/Judgment Day/Release branch cut
```

 - (T-9): RC1 Cut
 - (T-8 to T-7): RC testing and final QA testing
 - (T-5): Code Freeze
 - (T-2): Cut Final
 - (T-0): Release Day

1. The feature is tested on a PR and E2E test automation is added.
2. Large features are added behind a feature flag.

> 3. The feature flag is initially “off” in Cloud and will be rolled out slowly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The feature flag is initially “off” in Mattermost Cloud and will be rolled out slowly.
```

    - Feature flag rollout plan: https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/server/feature-flags/.

> 5. On-premise release branch and release candidate are cut based on cloud release. Prior to the cut to on-premise, the Release manager reviews new feature flags and provides a report to the PM/QA team for their review. Essentially a feature will be included in an on-prem release once the feature flag has been removed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Self-managed release branch and release candidate are cut based on the Mattermost Cloud release. Prior to the cut to self-managed, the Release Manager reviews new feature flags and provides a report to the PM/QA team for their review. Essentially a feature will be included in a self-managed release once the feature flag has been removed.
```

> 5. On-premise release branch and release candidate are cut based on cloud release. Prior to the cut to on-premise, the Release manager reviews new feature flags and provides a report to the PM/QA team for their review. Essentially a feature will be included in an on-prem release once the feature flag has been removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. On-prem release branch and release candidate are cut based on Cloud release. Prior to the cut to on-prem, the Release Manager reviews new feature flags and provides a report to the PM/QA teams for their review. Essentially a feature will be included in an on-prem release once the feature flag has been removed.
```

> 5. Self-managed release branch and release candidate are cut based on the Mattermost Cloud release. Prior to the cut to self-managed, the Release Manager reviews new feature flags and provides a report to the PM/QA teams for their review. Essentially a feature will be included in a self-managed release once the feature flag has been removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Self-Managed release branch and release candidate are cut based on the Mattermost Cloud release. Prior to the cut to Self-Managed, the Release Manager reviews new feature flags and provides a report to the PM/QA teams for their review. Essentially a feature will be included in a Self-Managed release once the feature flag has been removed.
```

> 6. On-premise release candidate is smoke tested.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Self-managed release candidate is smoke tested.
```

> 6. On-premise release candidate is smoke tested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. On-prem release candidate is smoke tested.
```

> 6. Self-managed release candidate is smoke tested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Self-Managed release candidate is smoke tested.
```

> 7. On-premise release final is cut and released publicly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
7. Self-managed release final is cut and released publicly.
```

> 7. On-premise release final is cut and released publicly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. On-prem release final is cut and released publicly.
```

> ## Tracking feature flags

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Tracking Feature Flags
```

> 7. Self-managed release final is cut and released publicly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Self-Managed release final is cut and released publicly.
```

> Release manager is able to look at the version we have deployed to Cloud. Also, when we are hooked up to split.io there will be a dashboard where you can see active and historic feature flags. Any feature that has its flag removed would be included on any on-prem releases past the point where that removal was merged. More details on feature flags: https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/server/feature-flags/.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Release Manager is able to look at the version we have deployed to Mattermost Cloud. Also, when we are hooked up to split.io there will be a dashboard where you can see active and historic feature flags. Any feature that has its flag removed would be included on any self-managed releases past the point where that removal was merged. More details on feature flags: https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/server/feature-flags/.
```

> Release manager is able to look at the version we have deployed to Cloud. Also, when we are hooked up to split.io there will be a dashboard where you can see active and historic feature flags. Any feature that has its flag removed would be included on any on-prem releases past the point where that removal was merged. More details on feature flags: https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/server/feature-flags/.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Release Manager is able to look at the version we have deployed to Cloud. Also, when we are hooked up to split.io, there will be a dashboard where you can see active and historic feature flags. Any feature that has its flag removed would be included on any on-prem releases after that removal was merged. More details on feature flags: https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/server/feature-flags/.
```

> Release Manager is able to look at the version we have deployed to Mattermost Cloud. Also, when we are hooked up to split.io, there will be a dashboard where you can see active and historic feature flags. Any feature that has its flag removed would be included on any self-managed releases past the point after that removal was merged. More details on feature flags: https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/server/feature-flags/.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Release Manager is able to look at the version we have deployed to Mattermost Cloud. Also, when we are hooked up to split.io, there will be a dashboard where you can see active and historic feature flags. Any feature that has its flag removed would be included on any Self-Managed releases past the point after that removal was merged. More details on feature flags: https://developers.mattermost.com/contribute/server/feature-flags/.
```

## Adding Milestones on PRs and Jira Tickets

> Releases are now focused on "shipping features/improvements when they're ready for Cloud, and then they'll get to an on-prem release once they've been on Cloud for 2+ weeks".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Releases are now focused on "shipping features/improvements when they're ready for Mattermost Cloud, and then they'll get to a self-managed release once they've been on Mattermost Cloud for 2+ weeks".
```

> Releases are now focused on "shipping features/improvements when they're ready for Cloud, and then they'll get to an on-prem release once they've been on Cloud for 2+ weeks".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Releases are now focused on shipping features and improvements when they're ready for Cloud, and then they'll get to an on-prem release once they've been available on Cloud for 2+ weeks".
```

> Releases are now focused on "shipping features and improvements when they're ready for Mattermost Cloud, and then they'll get to a self-managed release once they've been available on Mattermost Cloud for 2+ weeks".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Releases are now focused on "shipping features and improvements when they're ready for Mattermost Cloud, and then they'll get to a Self-Managed release once they've been available on Mattermost Cloud for 2+ weeks".
```

>  - A new “cloud” branch (based off from master) is used and any regression bug fixes for the next Cloud release will be cherry-picked there.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - A new “cloud” branch (based off from master) is used and any regression bug fixes for the next Mattermost Cloud release will be cherry-picked there.
```

>  - A new “cloud” branch (based off from master) is used and any regression bug fixes for the next Cloud release will be cherry-picked there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - A new “cloud” branch (based off of master) is used and any regression bug fixes for the next Cloud release will be cherry-picked there.
```

>  - This applies to webapp / server / redux / enterprise repos.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - This applies to webapp/server/Redux/Enterprise repos.
```

>  - A new “cloud” branch (based off of master) is used and any regression bug fixes for the next Mattermost Cloud release will be cherry-picked there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - A new Cloud branch (based off of master) is used, and any regression bug fixes for the next Mattermost Cloud release will be cherry-picked there.
```

>  - A fix version such as “Cloud (November 24)” is added in Jira to track regression bug fixes for Cloud releases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - A fix version such as “Cloud (November 24)” is added in Jira to track regression bug fixes for Mattermost Cloud releases.
```

>  - The on-prem releases will be based on Cloud releases. This is decided by the Release Manager / Cloud team based on the timeline between cloud releases and the release day of on-prem releases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - The self-managed releases will be based on Mattermost Cloud releases. This is decided by the Release Manager/Cloud team based on the timeline between Mattermost Cloud releases and the release day of self-managed releases.
```

>  - The on-prem releases will be based on Cloud releases. This is decided by the Release Manager / Cloud team based on the timeline between cloud releases and the release day of on-prem releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - The on-prem releases will be based on Cloud releases. This is decided by the Release Manager / Cloud team based on the timeline between Cloud releases and the release day of on-prem releases.
```

>  - The self-managed releases will be based on Mattermost Cloud releases. This is decided by the Release Manager/Cloud team based on the timeline between Mattermost Cloud releases and the release day of self-managed releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - The Self-Managed releases will be based on Mattermost Cloud releases. This is decided by the Release Manager/Cloud team based on the timeline between Mattermost Cloud releases and the release day of Self-Managed releases.
```

>  - PRs currently being merged into master don’t need an on-prem milestone added to them. Release Manager will track merged PRs and help ensure that correct milestones are added as needed. Any concerns can be brought up for discussion on a case-by-case basis. There may be a clearer process for this in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Cloud PRs currently being merged into master don’t need a self-managed release milestone added to them. Release Manager will track merged PRs and help ensure that correct milestones are added as needed. Any concerns can be brought up for discussion on a case-by-case basis. There may be updates to this process in the future.
```

> ## Triaging Cloud customer issues

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Triaging Mattermost Cloud Customer Issues
```

> ## Triaging Cloud customer issues

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Triaging Cloud Customer Issues
```

>  - Cloud PRs currently being merged into master don’t need a self-managed release milestone added to them. Release Manager will track merged PRs and help ensure that correct milestones are added as needed. Any concerns can be brought up for discussion on a case-by-case basis. There may be updates to this process in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Cloud PRs currently being merged into master don’t need a Self-Managed release milestone added to them. Release Manager will track merged PRs and help ensure that correct milestones are added as needed. Any concerns can be brought up for discussion on a case-by-case basis. There may be updates to this process in the future.
```

When triaging a bug report, consider the following:
 - Impact of the bug on customers
 - Severity of the issue
 - Risk and effort of reverting to the last version or fixing a bug

**Criteria**

> 1. "We need to revert to the last version" process

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. "We need to revert to the last version" process:
```

>  - Crash or all services are down due to a bug; affects some to all cloud customers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - Crash or all services are down due to a bug; affects some to all Mattermost Cloud customers.
```

>  - Crash or all services are down due to a bug; affects some to all cloud customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Crash or all services are down due to a bug; affects some to all Cloud customers.
```

> 2. "We need to release this ASAP" process

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. "We need to release this ASAP" process:
```

>  - A severe regression or loss of function; affects some to all customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - A severe regression or loss of functionality; affects some to all Cloud customers.
```

> 3. "It's ok to wait until next release" process

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. "It's OK to wait until next release" process:
```

>  - Loss of function, but little effect on customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Loss of function, but little impact on customers.
```

>  - Loss of function, but little impact on customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Loss of function, but little impact on Cloud customers.
```

**Responders**
 - Who is making the decision on which process above we need to follow?

>     - In some cases it is the SET on-call commander, in some cases other people such as the release manager or devs who notice / get notified about the report.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - In some cases it is the SET On-Call Commander, in some cases other people such as the Release Manager or devs who notice or get notified about the report.
```

>     - In some cases it is the SET on-call commander, in some cases other people such as the release manager or devs who notice / get notified about the report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - In some cases it is the SET On-Call Commander, in some cases other people such as the Release Manager or developers who notice or get notified about the report.
```

>  - Bugs will be fixed by either SET team or respective dev teams, depending on availability and expertise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Bugs will be fixed by either the SET team or by respective development teams, depending on availability and expertise.
```

>     - In some cases it is the SET On-Call Commander, in some cases other people such as the Release Manager or devs who notice or get notified about the report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - In some cases it's the SET On-Call Commander, and in some cases it's other people such as the Release Manager or developers who notice or get notified about the report.
```

**Reports**

>  - The Cloud team has created a central channel for escalations from support (Cloud Support channel in the Staff team). Additionally when a report is posted, it is important to notify the SET lead, release manager, and dev lead of the team that owns the feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - The Cloud team has created a central channel for escalations from support (Cloud Support channel in the Staff team). Additionally when a report is posted, it is important to notify the SET lead, Release Manager, and dev lead of the team that owns the feature.
```

>  - The Cloud team has created a central channel for escalations from support (Cloud Support channel in the Staff team). Additionally when a report is posted, it is important to notify the SET lead, release manager, and dev lead of the team that owns the feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - The Cloud team has created a central channel for escalations from Support: Cloud Support channel (available in the Staff team). Additionally when a report is posted, it is important to notify the SET Lead, Release Manager, and Development Lead of the team that owns the feature.
```

>  - The Cloud team has created a central channel for escalations from Cloud Support channel (available in the Staff team). Additionally when a report is posted, it is important to notify the SET Lead, Release Manager, and dev lead of the team that owns the feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - The Cloud team has created a central channel for escalations from Cloud Support channel (available in the Staff team). Additionally when a report is posted, it is important to notify the SET Lead, Release Manager, and Development Lead of the team that owns the feature.
```

**Q: When is release branch cut for a release?**

>   - A: Once the cloud release that the next on-prem release is releasing with has been shipped.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - A: Once the Mattermost Cloud release that will be used for the next self-managed release has been shipped.
```

>   - A: Once the cloud release that the next on-prem release is releasing with has been shipped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - A: Once the Cloud release has been shipped that the next on-prem release is based on.
```

>   - A: Once the Mattermost Cloud release that will be used for the next self-managed release has been shipped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - A: Once the Mattermost Cloud release that will be used for the next Self-Managed release has been shipped.
```

>   - A: Once the Mattermost Cloud release that will be used for the next Self-Managed release has been shipped.

Reviewer 3: Hoping we can get more specific on this one to have a more consistent and obvious connection between Cloud and On-premise releases. Not blocking for now, but this is very vague and we need to be more specific in the future.

Author: @wiersgallak I changed the text to: "Self-Managed releases are based off of Mattermost Cloud releases. For example, the Self-Managed v5.32.0 release is based off of the ``cloud-2021-01-26`` release tag. Currently the cadence is that the Mattermost Cloud shipped in the last week of a month will become the next Self-Managed release. The release branch for a Self-Managed release will be cut once the Mattermost Cloud release that will be used for the next Self-Managed release has been shipped."

Would something like this be helpful?

Reviewer 3: @amyblais yes, immensely.  Thank you!

**Q: What is community.mattermost kept on?**

>   - A: community.mattermost is kept on the most recent cloud release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - A: community.mattermost is kept on the most recent Mattermost Cloud release.
```

>   - A: community.mattermost is kept on the most recent cloud release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - A: community.mattermost is kept on the most recent Cloud release.
```

**Q: What is community-release.mattermost kept on?**

>   - A: community-release.mattermost is kept on the currently in progress cloud release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - A: community-release.mattermost is kept on the currently in-progress Mattermost Cloud release.
```

>   - A: community-release.mattermost is kept on the currently in progress cloud release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - A: community-release.mattermost is kept on the currently in-progress Cloud release.
```

  - A: See instructions here: https://developers.mattermost.com/internal/mobile-build-process/.

**Q: What is the process for community PRs?**

  - A: Review, merge, and cherry-pick.

**Q: Will RC testing remain, or will RC testing process change?**

  - There will be some manual RC testing until all release tests are automated.

> **Q: Are mobile and desktop included in the cloud first strategy?**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Q: Are mobile and desktop apps included in the "cloud first" strategy?**
```

Reviewer 2: I've left this as "cloud" because it's how we refer to this strategy internally.

> **Q: Are mobile and desktop included in the cloud first strategy?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Q: Are mobile and desktop updates included in the Cloud-first strategy?**
```

>   - Mobile and desktop apps are not affected at this point.

Reviewer 2: Needs a line break between Q and A.

>   - Mobile and desktop apps are not affected at this point.

Reviewer: Can we be a bit more clear about whether mobile and desktop updates are included in the cloud-first strategy? The current answer is a bit vague and doesn't directly answer the question.

Author: Clarified

> **Q: Creating tickets for features that were cut from on-prem - Is this also how it continues to be tracked to see whether it's ready for the next release?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Q: When creating tickets for features that were cut from on-prem, is this also how it continues to be tracked to see whether it's ready for the next release?**
```

Reviewer: The question above feels vague --  is there a simpler way to ask this question?

Author: Clarified

>   - Any feature that's promoted out of the feature flag process would be turned on for the on-prem releases. That way on-prem only gets fully ready or tested features and not ones still being tested. There will be some cases where we need to make a change to fix or change something for the on-prem release (e.g. a bug that only happens if you use a certain on-prem setting or a certain database we don't use in cloud). In those cases the on-prem release might have some changes that are not a direct copy of the cloud build.

Reviewer 2: Needs a line break between Q and A.

>   - Any feature that's promoted out of the feature flag process would be turned on for the on-prem releases. That way on-prem only gets fully ready or tested features and not ones still being tested. There will be some cases where we need to make a change to fix or change something for the on-prem release (e.g. a bug that only happens if you use a certain on-prem setting or a certain database we don't use in cloud). In those cases the on-prem release might have some changes that are not a direct copy of the cloud build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Any feature that's promoted out of the feature flag process would be turned on for the on-prem releases. That way on-prem only gets fully tested features that are ready for release, and does not get the ones still being tested. There will be some cases where we need to make a fix or change something for the on-prem release (e.g., a bug that only occurs if you use a certain on-prem setting or a certain database we don't use in Cloud). In those cases the on-prem release might have some changes that are not a direct copy of the Cloud build.
```

> **Q: What information does the customer support team need for Cloud releases?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Q: What information does the Customer Support team need for Cloud releases?**
```

>   - The Cloud Releases channel in the Staff team is used for release updates and for posting the changelog. This may be automated in the future. We're also planning to have a dashboard that shows the current version deployed to cloud, and which commits are in.

Reviewer 2: Needs a line break between Q and A.

>   - The Cloud Releases channel in the Staff team is used for release updates and for posting the changelog. This may be automated in the future. We're also planning to have a dashboard that shows the current version deployed to cloud, and which commits are in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The Cloud Releases channel in the Staff team is used for release updates and for posting the changelog. This may be automated in the future. We're also planning to have a dashboard that shows the current version deployed to Mattermost Cloud, and which commits are in.
```

>   - The Cloud Releases channel in the Staff team is used for release updates and for posting the changelog. This may be automated in the future. We're also planning to have a dashboard that shows the current version deployed to cloud, and which commits are in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The Cloud Releases channel in the Staff team is used for release updates and for posting the changelog. This may be automated in the future. We're also planning to have a dashboard that shows the current version deployed to Cloud, and which commits are included.
```

**Q: How will versioning work?**

>   - Version numbers will be less meaningful for Cloud. Proposing the name of this to be capabilities following the naming used by OpenGL. It's not whether or not a feature is enabled, but it's whether or not the server is capable of supporting the feature.

Reviewer 2: Needs a line break between Q and A.

>   - Version numbers will be less meaningful for Cloud. Proposing the name of this to be capabilities following the naming used by OpenGL. It's not whether or not a feature is enabled, but it's whether or not the server is capable of supporting the feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Version numbers will be less meaningful for Mattermost Cloud. Proposing the name of this to be capabilities following the naming used by OpenGL. It's not whether or not a feature is enabled, but whether or not the server is capable of supporting the feature.
```

  - Mobile and Desktop App releases are not based off of Mattermost Cloud releases at this point.

**Q: How do we track feature differences for Mattermost Cloud and Self-Managed releases?**

  - Any feature that's promoted out of the feature flag process would be turned on for the Self-Managed releases. That way Self-Managed releases only get fully tested features that are ready for release, and does not get the ones still being tested. There will be some cases where we need to make a fix or change something for the Self-Managed release (e.g., a bug that only occurs if you use a certain Self-Managed setting or a certain database we don't use in Mattermost Cloud). In those cases the Self-Managed release might have some changes that are not a direct copy of the Mattermost Cloud build.

**Q: What information does the Customer Support team need for Cloud releases?**

  - The Cloud Releases channel in the Staff team is used for release updates and for posting the changelog. This may be automated in the future. We're also planning to have a dashboard that shows the current version deployed to Mattermost Cloud, and which commits are included.

**Q: How will versioning work?**

>   - Version numbers will be less meaningful for Mattermost Cloud. Proposing the name of this to be capabilities following the naming used by OpenGL. It's not whether or not a feature is enabled, but whether or not the server is capable of supporting the feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Version numbers will be less meaningful for Mattermost Cloud. Proposing the name of this to be capabilities following the naming used by OpenGL. With Mattermost Cloud, it's not whether or not a feature is enabled, but whether or not the server is capable of supporting the feature.
```
